GNU Source Release Collection (GSRC)
####################################

Introduction
------------

The GNU Source Release Collection provides a simple way to install the
latest GNU packages in their own directory (on an existing system).

To get started, you must first configure it. From a shell, type:

    $ ./bootstrap
    $ ./configure --prefix=$HOME/gnu

You may choose to install the GNU software to any location you like by
setting the `--prefix' argument (they will be installed to ~/gnu in
the above example).

You will find the available GNU packages under the `gnu'
sub-directory. Since they encompass a large number of packages in
their own right, the GNUstep and GNOME projects have their own
sub-directories: `gnustep' and `gnome', respectively.

To get started, type "make help".


Status
------

For a complete listing of packages and their current status in GSRC,
see the file `TODO' (note: this file is best viewed with Emacs
Org-Mode). 


Bugs and build failures
-----------------------

If you encounter a package that does not build properly, please first
check its status in `TODO'; there are a few packages which are known to
not build properly. If the affected package is listed as `DONE' and
not `BROKEN', then this should be reported. Similarly, if you find any
outdated packages, please report them. All problems can be sent to the
GSRC bug mailing list <bug-gsrc@gnu.org>.


Copying
-------

GSRC is based on the GAR build system by Nick Moffitt and GARstow
enhancements by Adam Sampson.

Files from GAR and GARstow are under the following license unless
otherwise noted:

  Copyright (C) 2001 Nick Moffitt
  Copyright (C) 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 Adam Sampson

  Redistribution and/or use, with or without modification, is
  permitted.  This software is without warranty of any kind.  The
  author(s) shall not be liable in the event that use of the
  software causes damage.

Files specific to GSRC, including the build recipes, are Copyright (C)
Free Software Foundation and licensed under the GNU General Public
License, Version 3, or (at your option) any later version. Please see
the file `COPYING' for more information.
 
